README.md, before:

# MonteCarloMeasurements

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl)

This package facilitates nonlinear [uncertainty propagation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propagation_of_uncertainty) by means of Monte-Carlo methods. A variable or parameter might be associated with uncertainty if it is measured or otherwise estimated from data. We provide three core types to represent uncertainty: `Particles`, `StaticParticles` and `WeightedParticles`, all `<: Real`. (The name "Particles" comes from the [particle-filtering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Particle_filter) literature.) These types all form a Monte-Carlo approximation of the distribution of a floating point number, i.e., the distribution is represented by samples/particles. Correlated quantities are handled as well, see [multivariate particles](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl#multivariate-particles) below.

The goal of the package is similar to that of [Measurements.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl), to propagate the uncertainty from input of a function to the output. The difference compared to a `Measurement` is that `Particles` represent the distribution using a vector of unweighted particles, and can thus represent arbitrary distributions and handle nonlinear uncertainty propagation well. Functions like `f(x) = x²` or `f(x) = sign(x)` at `x=0`, are examples that are not handled well using linear uncertainty propagation ala [Measurements.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl).

A number of type `Particles` behaves just as any other `Number` while partaking in calculations. After a calculation, an approximation to the **complete distribution** of the output is captured and represented by the output particles. `mean`, `std` etc. can be extracted from the particles using the corresponding functions. `Particles` also interact with [Distributions.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/Distributions.jl), so that you can call, e.g., `Normal(p)` and get back a `Normal` type from distributions or `fit(Gamma, p)` to get a `Gamma`distribution. Particles can also be iterated, asked for `maximum/minimum`, `quantile` etc. If particles are plotted with `plot(p)`, a histogram is displayed. This requires Plots.jl.

Below, we show an example where an input uncertainty is propagated through `σ(x)`

![transformed densities](figs/transformed_densities.svg)

In the figure above, we see the probability-density function of the input `p(x)` depicted on the x-axis. The density of the output `p(y) = f(x)` is shown on the y-axis. Linear uncertainty propagation does this by linearizing `f(x)` and using the equations for an affine transformation of a Gaussian distribution, and hence produces a Gaussian approximation to the output density. The particles form a sampled approximation of the input density `p(x)`. After propagating them through `f(x)`, they form a sampled approximation to `p(y)` which correspond very well to the true output density, even though only 20 particles were used in this example. The figure can be reproduced by `examples/transformed_densities.jl`.

For a comparison of uncertainty propagation and nonlinear filtering, see [notes](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl#notes) below.

## Basic Examples
```julia
using MonteCarloMeasurements, Distributions
using MonteCarloMeasurements: ±

julia> 1 ± 0.1
(500 Particles{Float64,500}: 1.001 ± 0.1)

julia> p = StaticParticles(100)
(100 StaticParticles: -0.006 ± 1.069)

julia> std(p)
1.0687859218804316

julia> var(p)
1.142303346809804

julia> mean(p)
-0.0063862728919496315

julia> f = x -> 2x + 10
#104 (generic function with 1 method)

julia> 9.6 < f(p) < 10.4 # Comparisons are using the mean
true

julia> f(p) ≈ 10 # ≈ determines if f(p) is within 2σ of 10
true

julia> f(p) ≲ 15 # ≲ (\lesssim) tests if f(p) is significantly less than 15
true

julia> Normal(f(p)) # Fits a normal distribution
Normal{Float64}(μ=9.9872274542161, σ=2.1375718437608633)

julia> fit(Normal, f(p)) # Same as above
Normal{Float64}(μ=9.9872274542161, σ=2.1268571304548938)

julia> Particles(100, Uniform(0,2)) # A distribution can be supplied
(100 Particles{Float64,100}: 1.008 ± 0.58)

julia> Particles(1000, MvNormal([0,0],[2. 1; 1 4])) # A multivariate distribution will cause a vector of correlated particles
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,1000},1}:
 (1000 Particles: 0.00466 ± 1.42)
 (1000 Particles: 0.0819 ± 2.0)
```

## Why a package
Convenience. Also, the benefit of using this number type instead of manually calling a function `f` with perturbed inputs is that, at least in theory, each intermediate operation on `Particles` can exploit SIMD, since it's performed over a vector. If the function `f` is called several times, however, the compiler might not be smart enough to SIMD the entire thing. Further, any dynamic dispatch is only paid for once, whereas it would be paid for `N` times if doing things manually. The same goes for calculations that are done on regular input arguments without uncertainty, these will only be done once for `Particles` whereas they will be done `N` times if you repeatedly call `f`. One could perhaps also make an argument for cache locality being favorable for the `Particles` type, but I'm not sure this holds for all examples. Below, we show a small benchmark example (additional benchmarks further down) where we calculate a QR factorization of a matrix using `Particles` and compare it to manually doing it many times
```julia
using BenchmarkTools
A = [Particles(1000) for i = 1:3, j = 1:3]
B = similar(A, Float64)
@btime qr($A)
  119.243 μs (257 allocations: 456.58 KiB)
@btime foreach(_->qr($B), 1:1000) # Manually do qr 1000 times
  3.916 ms (4000 allocations: 500.00 KiB)
```
that's about a 30-fold reduction in time, and the repeated `qr` didn't even bother to sample new input points or store and handle the statistics of the result.
The type `StaticParticles` contains a statically sized, stack-allocated vector from [StaticArrays.jl](https://github.com/JuliaArrays/StaticArrays.jl). This type is suitable if the number of particles is small, say < 500 ish (but expect long compilation times if > 100, especially on julia < v1.1).
```julia
A = [StaticParticles(100) for i = 1:3, j = 1:3]
B = similar(A, Float64)
@btime qr($(copy(A)))
  8.392 μs (16 allocations: 18.94 KiB)
@btime map(_->qr($B), 1:100);
  690.590 μs (403 allocations: 50.92 KiB)
# Wow that's over 80 times faster
# Bigger matrix
A = [StaticParticles(100) for i = 1:30, j = 1:30]
B = similar(A, Float64)
@btime qr($(copy(A)))
  1.823 ms (99 allocations: 802.63 KiB)
@btime map(_->qr($B), 1:100);
  75.068 ms (403 allocations: 2.11 MiB)
# 40 times faster
```
`StaticParticles` allocate much less memory than regular `Particles`, but are more stressful for the compiler to handle.

## Constructors
The most basic constructor of `Particles` acts more or less like `randn(N)`, i.e., it creates a particle cloud with distribution `Normal(0,1)`. To create a particle cloud with distribution `Normal(μ,σ)`, you can call `μ + σ*Particles(N)`, or `Particles(N, Normal(μ,σ))`. This last constructor works with any distribution from which one can sample.
One can also call (`Particles/StaticParticles`)
- `Particles(v::Vector)` pre-sampled particles
- `Particles(N = 500, d::Distribution = Normal(0,1))` samples `N` particles from the distribution `d`.
- We don't export the ± operator (`\pm`) so as to not mess with [Measurements.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl), but you can import it by `import MonteCarloMeasurements.±`. We then have `μ ± σ = μ + σ*Particles(DEFAUL_NUM_PARTICLES)`, where the global constant `DEFAUL_NUM_PARTICLES = 500`. You can change this if you would like, or simply define your own `±` operator like `±(μ,σ) = μ + σ*Particles(my_default_number, my_default_distribution)`. The upside-down operator ∓ (`\mp`) instead creates a `StaticParticles(100)`.

**Common univariate distributions are sampled systematically**, meaning that a single random number is drawn and used to seed the sample. This will reduce the variance of the sample. If this is not desired, call `Particles(N, [d]; systematic=false)` The systematic sample can maintain its originally sorted order by calling `Particles(N, permute=false)`, but the default is to permute the sample so as to not have different `Particles` correlate strongly with each other.

Construction of `Particles` as [sigma points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unscented_transform#Sigma_points) or by [latin hypercube sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_hypercube_sampling) is detailed [below](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl#sigma-points).



## Multivariate particles
The constructors can be called with multivariate distributions, returning `v::Vector{Particle}` where particles are sampled from the desired multivariate distribution. Once `v` is propagated through a function `v2 = f(v)`, the results can be analyzed by, e.g., asking for `mean(v2)` and `cov(v2)`, or by fitting a multivariate distribution, e.g., `MvNormal(v2)`.

A `v::Vector{Particle}` can be converted into a `Matrix` by calling `Matrix(v)` and this will have a size of `N × dim`. ~~You can also index into `v` like it was already a matrix.~~([This was a bad idea](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/show-for-vector-type-that-defines-matrix-getindex/23732/2?u=baggepinnen))

Broadcasting the ±/∓ operators works as you would expect, `zeros(3) .± 1` gives you a three-vector of *independent* particles, so does `zeros(3) .+ Particles.(N)`.

Independent multivariate systematic samples can be created using the function `outer_product` or the non-exported operator ⊗ (`\otimes`).

#### Examples
The following example creates a vector of two `Particles`. Since they were created independently of each other, they are independent and uncorrelated and have the covariance matrix `Σ = Diagonal([1², 2²])`. The linear transform with the matrix `A` should in theory change this covariance matrix to `AΣAᵀ`, which we can verify be asking for the covariance matrix of the output particles.
```julia
julia> p = [1 ± 1, 5 ± 2]
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,500},1}:
 (500 Particles: 1.0 ± 1.0)
 (500 Particles: 4.99 ± 2.0)

julia> A = randn(2,2)
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
  0.119307   0.791648
 -0.332829  -0.524872

julia> y = A*p
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,500},1}:
 (500 Particles: 4.07 ± 1.6)  
 (500 Particles: -2.95 ± 1.12)

julia> cov(y)
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
  2.55287  -1.74549
 -1.74549   1.25673

julia> A*Diagonal([1^2, 2^2])*A'
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
  2.52106  -1.70176
 -1.70176   1.21274
```
To create particles that exhibit a known covariance/correlation, use the appropriate constructor, e.g.,
```julia
julia> p = Particles(10000, MvLogNormal(MvNormal([2, 1],[2. 1;1 3])))
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,10000},1}:
 (10000 Particles: 19.2 ± 39.8)
 (10000 Particles: 13.0 ± 81.2)

julia> cov(log.(p))
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
 1.99736  1.00008
 1.00008  3.00562

 julia> mean(log.(p))
2-element Array{Float64,1}:
 1.99659
 1.00218
```

## Sigma points
The [unscented transform](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unscented_transform#Sigma_points) uses a small number of points called *sigma points* to propagate the first and second moments of a probability density. We provide a function `sigmapoints(μ, Σ)` that creates a `Matrix` of `2n+1` sigma points, where `n` is the dimension. This can be used to initialize any kind of `AbstractParticles`, e.g.:
```julia
julia> m = [1,2]

julia> Σ = [3. 1; 1 4]

julia> p = StaticParticles(sigmapoints(m,Σ))
2-element Array{StaticParticles{Float64,5},1}:
 (5 StaticParticles: 1.0 ± 1.73) # 2n+1 = 5 particles
 (5 StaticParticles: 2.0 ± 2.0)

julia> cov(p) ≈ Σ
true

julia> mean(p) ≈ m
true
```
`sigmapoints` also accepts a `Normal/MvNormal` object as input.

## Latin hypercube sampling
We do not provide functionality for [latin hypercube sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_hypercube_sampling), rather, we show how to use the package [LatinHypercubeSampling.jl](https://github.com/MrUrq/LatinHypercubeSampling.jl) to initialize particles.
```julia
# import Pkg; Pkg.add("LatinHypercubeSampling")
using MonteCarloMeasurements, LatinHypercubeSampling
ndims  = 2
N      = 120  # Number of particles
ngen   = 1000 # How long to run optimization
X, fit = LHCoptim(N,ndims,ngenerations)
X      = X .- mean(X,dims=1) # Normalize the sample
X    ./= std(X,dims=1)
m, Σ   = [1,2], [2 1; 1 4] # Desired mean and covariance
particles = Matrix((m .+ cholesky(Σ).L * X')') # Transform sample
p         = Particles(particles)
plot(scatter(eachcol(particles)..., title="Sample"), plot(fit, title="Fitness vs. iteration"))

julia> mean(p)
2-element Array{Float64,1}:
 1.0
 2.0

julia> cov(p)
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
 2.0       0.937557
 0.937557  2.93756
```
Latin hypercube sampling creates an approximately uniform sample in `ndims` dimensions. The applied transformation gives the particles the desired mean and covariance. The statistics of the sample can be visualized:
```julia
using StatsPlots
corrplot(particles)
plot(density(p[1]), density(p[2]))
```

## Plotting
An instance of `p::Particles` can be plotted using `plot(p)`, that creates a histogram by default. If [`StatsPlots.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaPlots/StatsPlots.jl) is available, one can call `density(p)` to get a slightly different visualization. Vectors of particles can be plotted using one of
- `errorbarplot(x,y,[q=0.025])`: `q` determines the quantiles, set to `0` for max/min.
- `mcplot(x,y)`: Plots all trajectories
- `ribbonplot(x,y,[k=2])`: Plots with `k` standard deviations shaded area around mean.


Below is an example using [ControlSystems.jl](https://github.com/JuliaControl/ControlSystems.jl)
```julia
using ControlSystems, MonteCarloMeasurements, StatsPlots
import MonteCarloMeasurements: ±

p = 1 ± 0.1
ζ = 0.3 ± 0.1
ω = 1 ± 0.1
G = tf([p*ω], [1, 2ζ*ω, ω^2]) # Transfer function with uncertain parameters

dc = dcgain(G)[]
# 500 Particles: 1.012 ± 0.149
density(dc, title="Probability density of DC-gain")
```
![A density](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/dens.svg)
```julia
w = exp10.(LinRange(-1,1,200)) # Frequency vector
mag, phase = bode(G,w) .|> vec

errorbarplot(w,mag, yscale=:log10, xscale=:log10)
```
![A bodeplot with errorbars](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/errorbar.svg)
```julia
mcplot(w,mag, yscale=:log10, xscale=:log10, alpha=0.2)
```
![A bodeplot with lots of lines](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/mc.svg)
```julia
ribbonplot(w,mag, yscale=:identity, xscale=:log10, alpha=0.2)
```
![A bodeplot with a ribbon](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/rib.svg)

### Control systems benchmark
```julia
using MonteCarloMeasurements, ControlSystems, BenchmarkTools, Printf
w  = exp10.(LinRange(-1,1,200)) # Frequency vector
p  = 1 ± 0.1
ζ  = 0.3 ± 0.1
ω  = 1 ± 0.1
G  = tf([p*ω], [1, 2ζ*ω, ω^2])
t1 = @belapsed bode($G,$w)
p  = 1
ζ  = 0.3
ω  = 1
G  = tf([p*ω], [1, 2ζ*ω, ω^2])
t2 = @belapsed bode($G,$w)

@printf("Time with 500 particles: %16.4fms \nTime with regular floating point: %7.4fms\n500×floating point time: %16.4fms\nSpeedup factor: %22.1fx\n", 1000*t1, 1000*t2, 1000*500t2, 500t2/t1)
  # Time with 500 particles:          14.9095ms
  # Time with regular floating point:  0.5517ms
  # 500×floating point time:         275.8640ms
  # Speedup factor:                   18.5x
```

## Differential Equations
[The tutorial](http://juliadiffeq.org/DiffEqTutorials.jl/html/type_handling/uncertainties.html) for solving differential equations using `Measurement` works for `Particles` as well.


## Overloading a new function
If a method for `Particles` is not implemented for your function `yourfunc` in module `Mod`, the pattern looks like this
```julia
f = nameof(yourfunc)
for ParticlesType in (:Particles, :StaticParticles)
  @eval function (Mod.$f)(p::$ParticlesType)
      $ParticlesType(map($f, p.particles))
  end
end
```
This defines the one-argument method for both `Particles` and `StaticParticles`. For two-argument methods, see [the source](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/src/particles.jl#L80). If the function is from base or stdlib, you can just add it to the appropriate list in the source and submit a PR :)

### ℝⁿ → ℝⁿ functions
These functions do not work with `Particles` out of the box. Special cases are currently implemented for
- `exp : ℝ(n×n) → ℝ(n×n)`   exponential matrix

The function `ℝⁿ2ℝⁿ_function(f::Function, p::AbstractArray{T})` applies `f : ℝⁿ → ℝⁿ` to an array of particles.

### ℂ → ℂ functions
These functions do not work with `Particles` out of the box. Special cases are currently implemented for
- `sqrt`

The function `ℂ2ℂ_function(f::Function, p::AbstractArray{T})` applies `f : ℂ → ℂ ` to `z::Complex{<:AbstractParticles}`.

## Weighted particles
The type `WeightedParticles` contains an additional field `logweights`. You may modify this field as you see fit, e.g.
```julia
reweight(p,y) = (p.logweights .+= logpdf.(Normal(0,1), y .- p.particles))
```
where `y` would be some measurement. After this you can resample the particles using `resample!(p)`. This performs a systematic resample with replacement, where each particle is sampled proportionally to `exp.(logweights)`.

## Monte-Carlo simulation by `map/pmap`
Some functions will not work when the input arguments are of type `Particles`. For this kind of function, we provide a fallback onto a traditional `map(f,p.particles)`. The only thing you need to do is to decorate the function call with the macro `@bymap` like so:
```julia
f(x) = 3x^2
p = 1 ± 0.1
r = @bymap f(p)
```
We further provide the macro `@bypmap` which does exactly the same thing, but with a `pmap` (parallel map) instead, allowing you to run several invocations of `f` in a distributed fashion.

These macros will map the function `f` over each element of `p::Particles{T,N}`, such that `f` is only called with arguments of type `T`, e.g., `Float64`. This handles arguments that are multivaiate particles `<: Vector{<:AbstractParticles}` as well.

These macros will typically be slower than calling `f(p)`, but allow for Monte-Carlo simulation of things like calls to `Optim.optimize` etc., which fail if called like `optimize(f,p)`. If `f` is very expensive, `@bypmap` might prove prove faster than calling `f` with `p`, it's worth a try. The usual caveats for distributed computing applies, all code must be loaded on all workers etc.


## Notes
The table below compares methods for uncertainty propagation with their parallel in nonlinear filtering.

| Uncertainty propagation  | Dynamic filtering       | Method              |
| -------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| Measurements.jl          | Extended Kalman filter  | Linearization       |
| `Particles(sigmapoints)` | Unscented Kalman Filter | Unscented transform |
| `Particles`              | Particle Filter         | Monte Carlo         |

Commit message:

Improve support for transforming moments and LHS

README.md, after:

# MonteCarloMeasurements

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl)

This package facilitates nonlinear [uncertainty propagation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propagation_of_uncertainty) by means of Monte-Carlo methods. A variable or parameter might be associated with uncertainty if it is measured or otherwise estimated from data. We provide three core types to represent uncertainty: `Particles`, `StaticParticles` and `WeightedParticles`, all `<: Real`. (The name "Particles" comes from the [particle-filtering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Particle_filter) literature.) These types all form a Monte-Carlo approximation of the distribution of a floating point number, i.e., the distribution is represented by samples/particles. Correlated quantities are handled as well, see [multivariate particles](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl#multivariate-particles) below.

The goal of the package is similar to that of [Measurements.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl), to propagate the uncertainty from input of a function to the output. The difference compared to a `Measurement` is that `Particles` represent the distribution using a vector of unweighted particles, and can thus represent arbitrary distributions and handle nonlinear uncertainty propagation well. Functions like `f(x) = x²` or `f(x) = sign(x)` at `x=0`, are examples that are not handled well using linear uncertainty propagation ala [Measurements.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl).

A number of type `Particles` behaves just as any other `Number` while partaking in calculations. After a calculation, an approximation to the **complete distribution** of the output is captured and represented by the output particles. `mean`, `std` etc. can be extracted from the particles using the corresponding functions. `Particles` also interact with [Distributions.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/Distributions.jl), so that you can call, e.g., `Normal(p)` and get back a `Normal` type from distributions or `fit(Gamma, p)` to get a `Gamma`distribution. Particles can also be iterated, asked for `maximum/minimum`, `quantile` etc. If particles are plotted with `plot(p)`, a histogram is displayed. This requires Plots.jl.

Below, we show an example where an input uncertainty is propagated through `σ(x)`

![transformed densities](figs/transformed_densities.svg)

In the figure above, we see the probability-density function of the input `p(x)` depicted on the x-axis. The density of the output `p(y) = f(x)` is shown on the y-axis. Linear uncertainty propagation does this by linearizing `f(x)` and using the equations for an affine transformation of a Gaussian distribution, and hence produces a Gaussian approximation to the output density. The particles form a sampled approximation of the input density `p(x)`. After propagating them through `f(x)`, they form a sampled approximation to `p(y)` which correspond very well to the true output density, even though only 20 particles were used in this example. The figure can be reproduced by `examples/transformed_densities.jl`.

For a comparison of uncertainty propagation and nonlinear filtering, see [notes](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl#notes) below.

## Basic Examples
```julia
using MonteCarloMeasurements, Distributions
using MonteCarloMeasurements: ±

julia> 1 ± 0.1
(500 Particles{Float64,500}: 1.001 ± 0.1)

julia> p = StaticParticles(100)
(100 StaticParticles: -0.006 ± 1.069)

julia> std(p)
1.0687859218804316

julia> var(p)
1.142303346809804

julia> mean(p)
-0.0063862728919496315

julia> f = x -> 2x + 10
#104 (generic function with 1 method)

julia> 9.6 < f(p) < 10.4 # Comparisons are using the mean
true

julia> f(p) ≈ 10 # ≈ determines if f(p) is within 2σ of 10
true

julia> f(p) ≲ 15 # ≲ (\lesssim) tests if f(p) is significantly less than 15
true

julia> Normal(f(p)) # Fits a normal distribution
Normal{Float64}(μ=9.9872274542161, σ=2.1375718437608633)

julia> fit(Normal, f(p)) # Same as above
Normal{Float64}(μ=9.9872274542161, σ=2.1268571304548938)

julia> Particles(100, Uniform(0,2)) # A distribution can be supplied
(100 Particles{Float64,100}: 1.008 ± 0.58)

julia> Particles(1000, MvNormal([0,0],[2. 1; 1 4])) # A multivariate distribution will cause a vector of correlated particles
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,1000},1}:
 (1000 Particles: 0.00466 ± 1.42)
 (1000 Particles: 0.0819 ± 2.0)
```

## Why a package
Convenience. Also, the benefit of using this number type instead of manually calling a function `f` with perturbed inputs is that, at least in theory, each intermediate operation on `Particles` can exploit SIMD, since it's performed over a vector. If the function `f` is called several times, however, the compiler might not be smart enough to SIMD the entire thing. Further, any dynamic dispatch is only paid for once, whereas it would be paid for `N` times if doing things manually. The same goes for calculations that are done on regular input arguments without uncertainty, these will only be done once for `Particles` whereas they will be done `N` times if you repeatedly call `f`. One could perhaps also make an argument for cache locality being favorable for the `Particles` type, but I'm not sure this holds for all examples. Below, we show a small benchmark example (additional benchmarks further down) where we calculate a QR factorization of a matrix using `Particles` and compare it to manually doing it many times
```julia
using BenchmarkTools
A = [Particles(1000) for i = 1:3, j = 1:3]
B = similar(A, Float64)
@btime qr($A)
  119.243 μs (257 allocations: 456.58 KiB)
@btime foreach(_->qr($B), 1:1000) # Manually do qr 1000 times
  3.916 ms (4000 allocations: 500.00 KiB)
```
that's about a 30-fold reduction in time, and the repeated `qr` didn't even bother to sample new input points or store and handle the statistics of the result.
The type `StaticParticles` contains a statically sized, stack-allocated vector from [StaticArrays.jl](https://github.com/JuliaArrays/StaticArrays.jl). This type is suitable if the number of particles is small, say < 500 ish (but expect long compilation times if > 100, especially on julia < v1.1).
```julia
A = [StaticParticles(100) for i = 1:3, j = 1:3]
B = similar(A, Float64)
@btime qr($(copy(A)))
  8.392 μs (16 allocations: 18.94 KiB)
@btime map(_->qr($B), 1:100);
  690.590 μs (403 allocations: 50.92 KiB)
# Wow that's over 80 times faster
# Bigger matrix
A = [StaticParticles(100) for i = 1:30, j = 1:30]
B = similar(A, Float64)
@btime qr($(copy(A)))
  1.823 ms (99 allocations: 802.63 KiB)
@btime map(_->qr($B), 1:100);
  75.068 ms (403 allocations: 2.11 MiB)
# 40 times faster
```
`StaticParticles` allocate much less memory than regular `Particles`, but are more stressful for the compiler to handle.

## Constructors
The most basic constructor of `Particles` acts more or less like `randn(N)`, i.e., it creates a particle cloud with distribution `Normal(0,1)`. To create a particle cloud with distribution `Normal(μ,σ)`, you can call `μ + σ*Particles(N)`, or `Particles(N, Normal(μ,σ))`. This last constructor works with any distribution from which one can sample.
One can also call (`Particles/StaticParticles`)
- `Particles(v::Vector)` pre-sampled particles
- `Particles(N = 500, d::Distribution = Normal(0,1))` samples `N` particles from the distribution `d`.
- We don't export the ± operator (`\pm`) so as to not mess with [Measurements.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/Measurements.jl), but you can import it by `import MonteCarloMeasurements.±`. We then have `μ ± σ = μ + σ*Particles(DEFAUL_NUM_PARTICLES)`, where the global constant `DEFAUL_NUM_PARTICLES = 500`. You can change this if you would like, or simply define your own `±` operator like `±(μ,σ) = μ + σ*Particles(my_default_number, my_default_distribution)`. The upside-down operator ∓ (`\mp`) instead creates a `StaticParticles(100)`.

**Common univariate distributions are sampled systematically**, meaning that a single random number is drawn and used to seed the sample. This will reduce the variance of the sample. If this is not desired, call `Particles(N, [d]; systematic=false)` The systematic sample can maintain its originally sorted order by calling `Particles(N, permute=false)`, but the default is to permute the sample so as to not have different `Particles` correlate strongly with each other.

Construction of `Particles` as [sigma points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unscented_transform#Sigma_points) or by [latin hypercube sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_hypercube_sampling) is detailed [below](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl#sigma-points).



## Multivariate particles
The constructors can be called with multivariate distributions, returning `v::Vector{Particle}` where particles are sampled from the desired multivariate distribution. Once `v` is propagated through a function `v2 = f(v)`, the results can be analyzed by, e.g., asking for `mean(v2)` and `cov(v2)`, or by fitting a multivariate distribution, e.g., `MvNormal(v2)`.

A `v::Vector{Particle}` can be converted into a `Matrix` by calling `Matrix(v)` and this will have a size of `N × dim`. ~~You can also index into `v` like it was already a matrix.~~([This was a bad idea](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/show-for-vector-type-that-defines-matrix-getindex/23732/2?u=baggepinnen))

Broadcasting the ±/∓ operators works as you would expect, `zeros(3) .± 1` gives you a three-vector of *independent* particles, so does `zeros(3) .+ Particles.(N)`.

Independent multivariate systematic samples can be created using the function `outer_product` or the non-exported operator ⊗ (`\otimes`).

#### Examples
The following example creates a vector of two `Particles`. Since they were created independently of each other, they are independent and uncorrelated and have the covariance matrix `Σ = Diagonal([1², 2²])`. The linear transform with the matrix `A` should in theory change this covariance matrix to `AΣAᵀ`, which we can verify be asking for the covariance matrix of the output particles.
```julia
julia> p = [1 ± 1, 5 ± 2]
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,500},1}:
 (500 Particles: 1.0 ± 1.0)
 (500 Particles: 4.99 ± 2.0)

julia> A = randn(2,2)
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
  0.119307   0.791648
 -0.332829  -0.524872

julia> y = A*p
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,500},1}:
 (500 Particles: 4.07 ± 1.6)  
 (500 Particles: -2.95 ± 1.12)

julia> cov(y)
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
  2.55287  -1.74549
 -1.74549   1.25673

julia> A*Diagonal([1^2, 2^2])*A'
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
  2.52106  -1.70176
 -1.70176   1.21274
```
To create particles that exhibit a known covariance/correlation, use the appropriate constructor, e.g.,
```julia
julia> p = Particles(10000, MvLogNormal(MvNormal([2, 1],[2. 1;1 3])))
2-element Array{Particles{Float64,10000},1}:
 (10000 Particles: 19.2 ± 39.8)
 (10000 Particles: 13.0 ± 81.2)

julia> cov(log.(p))
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
 1.99736  1.00008
 1.00008  3.00562

 julia> mean(log.(p))
2-element Array{Float64,1}:
 1.99659
 1.00218
```

## Sigma points
The [unscented transform](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unscented_transform#Sigma_points) uses a small number of points called *sigma points* to propagate the first and second moments of a probability density. We provide a function `sigmapoints(μ, Σ)` that creates a `Matrix` of `2n+1` sigma points, where `n` is the dimension. This can be used to initialize any kind of `AbstractParticles`, e.g.:
```julia
julia> m = [1,2]

julia> Σ = [3. 1; 1 4]

julia> p = StaticParticles(sigmapoints(m,Σ))
2-element Array{StaticParticles{Float64,5},1}:
 (5 StaticParticles: 1.0 ± 1.73) # 2n+1 = 5 particles
 (5 StaticParticles: 2.0 ± 2.0)

julia> cov(p) ≈ Σ
true

julia> mean(p) ≈ m
true
```
`sigmapoints` also accepts a `Normal/MvNormal` object as input.

## Latin hypercube sampling
We do not provide functionality for [latin hypercube sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_hypercube_sampling), rather, we show how to use the package [LatinHypercubeSampling.jl](https://github.com/MrUrq/LatinHypercubeSampling.jl) to initialize particles.
```julia
# import Pkg; Pkg.add("LatinHypercubeSampling")
using MonteCarloMeasurements, LatinHypercubeSampling
ndims  = 2
N      = 100  # Number of particles
ngen   = 1000 # How long to run optimization
X, fit = LHCoptim(N,ndims,ngen)
m, Σ   = [1,2], [2 1; 1 4] # Desired mean and covariance
particle_matrix = transform_moments(X,m,Σ)
p      = Particles(particle_matrix) # These are our LHS particles with correct moments
plot(scatter(eachcol(particles)..., title="Sample"), plot(fit, title="Fitness vs. iteration"))

julia> mean(p)
2-element Array{Float64,1}:
 1.0
 2.0

julia> cov(p)
2×2 Array{Float64,2}:
 2.0  1.0
 1.0  4.0
```
Latin hypercube sampling creates an approximately uniform sample in `ndims` dimensions. The applied transformation gives the particles the desired mean and covariance.
*Caveat:* Unfortunately, endowing the sampled latin hypercube with a desired *non-diagonal* covariance matrix destroys the latin properties for all dimensions but the first. This does not happen for diagonal covariance matrices.

 The statistics of the sample can be visualized:
```julia
using StatsPlots
corrplot(particles)
plot(density(p[1]), density(p[2]))
```
see also `examples/lhs.jl`.

## Plotting
An instance of `p::Particles` can be plotted using `plot(p)`, that creates a histogram by default. If [`StatsPlots.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaPlots/StatsPlots.jl) is available, one can call `density(p)` to get a slightly different visualization. Vectors of particles can be plotted using one of
- `errorbarplot(x,y,[q=0.025])`: `q` determines the quantiles, set to `0` for max/min.
- `mcplot(x,y)`: Plots all trajectories
- `ribbonplot(x,y,[k=2])`: Plots with `k` standard deviations shaded area around mean.


Below is an example using [ControlSystems.jl](https://github.com/JuliaControl/ControlSystems.jl)
```julia
using ControlSystems, MonteCarloMeasurements, StatsPlots
import MonteCarloMeasurements: ±

p = 1 ± 0.1
ζ = 0.3 ± 0.1
ω = 1 ± 0.1
G = tf([p*ω], [1, 2ζ*ω, ω^2]) # Transfer function with uncertain parameters

dc = dcgain(G)[]
# 500 Particles: 1.012 ± 0.149
density(dc, title="Probability density of DC-gain")
```
![A density](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/dens.svg)
```julia
w = exp10.(LinRange(-1,1,200)) # Frequency vector
mag, phase = bode(G,w) .|> vec

errorbarplot(w,mag, yscale=:log10, xscale=:log10)
```
![A bodeplot with errorbars](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/errorbar.svg)
```julia
mcplot(w,mag, yscale=:log10, xscale=:log10, alpha=0.2)
```
![A bodeplot with lots of lines](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/mc.svg)
```julia
ribbonplot(w,mag, yscale=:identity, xscale=:log10, alpha=0.2)
```
![A bodeplot with a ribbon](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/figs/rib.svg)

### Control systems benchmark
```julia
using MonteCarloMeasurements, ControlSystems, BenchmarkTools, Printf
w  = exp10.(LinRange(-1,1,200)) # Frequency vector
p  = 1 ± 0.1
ζ  = 0.3 ± 0.1
ω  = 1 ± 0.1
G  = tf([p*ω], [1, 2ζ*ω, ω^2])
t1 = @belapsed bode($G,$w)
p  = 1
ζ  = 0.3
ω  = 1
G  = tf([p*ω], [1, 2ζ*ω, ω^2])
t2 = @belapsed bode($G,$w)

@printf("Time with 500 particles: %16.4fms \nTime with regular floating point: %7.4fms\n500×floating point time: %16.4fms\nSpeedup factor: %22.1fx\n", 1000*t1, 1000*t2, 1000*500t2, 500t2/t1)
  # Time with 500 particles:          14.9095ms
  # Time with regular floating point:  0.5517ms
  # 500×floating point time:         275.8640ms
  # Speedup factor:                   18.5x
```

## Differential Equations
[The tutorial](http://juliadiffeq.org/DiffEqTutorials.jl/html/type_handling/uncertainties.html) for solving differential equations using `Measurement` works for `Particles` as well.


## Overloading a new function
If a method for `Particles` is not implemented for your function `yourfunc` in module `Mod`, the pattern looks like this
```julia
f = nameof(yourfunc)
for ParticlesType in (:Particles, :StaticParticles)
  @eval function (Mod.$f)(p::$ParticlesType)
      $ParticlesType(map($f, p.particles))
  end
end
```
This defines the one-argument method for both `Particles` and `StaticParticles`. For two-argument methods, see [the source](https://github.com/baggepinnen/MonteCarloMeasurements.jl/blob/master/src/particles.jl#L80). If the function is from base or stdlib, you can just add it to the appropriate list in the source and submit a PR :)

### ℝⁿ → ℝⁿ functions
These functions do not work with `Particles` out of the box. Special cases are currently implemented for
- `exp : ℝ(n×n) → ℝ(n×n)`   exponential matrix

The function `ℝⁿ2ℝⁿ_function(f::Function, p::AbstractArray{T})` applies `f : ℝⁿ → ℝⁿ` to an array of particles.

### ℂ → ℂ functions
These functions do not work with `Particles` out of the box. Special cases are currently implemented for
- `sqrt`

The function `ℂ2ℂ_function(f::Function, p::AbstractArray{T})` applies `f : ℂ → ℂ ` to `z::Complex{<:AbstractParticles}`.

## Weighted particles
The type `WeightedParticles` contains an additional field `logweights`. You may modify this field as you see fit, e.g.
```julia
reweight(p,y) = (p.logweights .+= logpdf.(Normal(0,1), y .- p.particles))
```
where `y` would be some measurement. After this you can resample the particles using `resample!(p)`. This performs a systematic resample with replacement, where each particle is sampled proportionally to `exp.(logweights)`.

## Monte-Carlo simulation by `map/pmap`
Some functions will not work when the input arguments are of type `Particles`. For this kind of function, we provide a fallback onto a traditional `map(f,p.particles)`. The only thing you need to do is to decorate the function call with the macro `@bymap` like so:
```julia
f(x) = 3x^2
p = 1 ± 0.1
r = @bymap f(p)
```
We further provide the macro `@bypmap` which does exactly the same thing, but with a `pmap` (parallel map) instead, allowing you to run several invocations of `f` in a distributed fashion.

These macros will map the function `f` over each element of `p::Particles{T,N}`, such that `f` is only called with arguments of type `T`, e.g., `Float64`. This handles arguments that are multivaiate particles `<: Vector{<:AbstractParticles}` as well.

These macros will typically be slower than calling `f(p)`, but allow for Monte-Carlo simulation of things like calls to `Optim.optimize` etc., which fail if called like `optimize(f,p)`. If `f` is very expensive, `@bypmap` might prove prove faster than calling `f` with `p`, it's worth a try. The usual caveats for distributed computing applies, all code must be loaded on all workers etc.


## Notes
The table below compares methods for uncertainty propagation with their parallel in nonlinear filtering.

| Uncertainty propagation  | Dynamic filtering       | Method              |
| -------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| Measurements.jl          | Extended Kalman filter  | Linearization       |
| `Particles(sigmapoints)` | Unscented Kalman Filter | Unscented transform |
| `Particles`              | Particle Filter         | Monte Carlo         |
